Scot Barnett, "Psychogeographies of Writing: Ma(r)king Space at the Limits of Representation," Kairos 16.3

As I argue in this webtext, while critical spatial theory may be well-suited to help us critique space and spatial praxis from within a historical materialist framework, it has a great deal less to offer when it comes to examining other aspects of spatiality—including, as I discuss here, those “pre-reflective” (i.e. pre-theoretical, pre-representational, and pre-ideological) aspects of our embodied being-in-the-world—that, because they often fail to register at the level of conscious consideration, tend to belie critique’s abilities to demystify spatial relations and bring them under the regime of a concept capable of being known and represented within various symbolic structures.

 In their respective discussions of space, or “world” as they prefer, Heidegger and Merleau-Ponty argued that it’s our pre-reflective embodied being-in-the-world—the way, for example, our bodies unconsciously record and make tacit adjustments to objects, affects, and others without our having to first form ideas or theories about them—that, paradoxically, establishes the conditions of possibility for lived existence while at the same time making difficult, if not impossible, efforts to render these pre-reflective and immemorial traces of experience present as ex post facto objects of knowledge or theorization. 

 In such cases, as Bernard-Donals and others have argued, writing invariably falls short of its charge to recuperate the precise cause and significance of such events for the simple reason that the event itself “did not register on, let alone become integrated into, the consciousness of” the writer (Bernard-Donals, 2001, p. 145). The most we can hope for writing, then, is that it remind us of these events rather than represent them to us. 

 Although it shares a great deal with these projects, Nold’s project differs insofar as it has foregrounded the problems memory and representation pose for our abilities to fully explain how we felt at a particular time and place. Using mobile technologies such as a GPS and basic biometrics such as galvanic skin response (GSR) sensors, Nold’s project enabled participants to record their emotional responses while walking through a neighborhood, town, or city. Once uploaded to his custom-built mapping software, the data collected by the GPS and GSR sensors combine to generate what Nold called an “Emotion Map,” a visual representation of the participant’s emotional states as they occurred during his or her walk. In a series of follow-up interviews, Nold invited participants to narrate their Emotion Maps, explaining why, for example, the GSR sensors spiked at one particular location but not another. Although most participants managed to craft persuasive narratives about their emotional states, in many cases their abilities to do so were frustrated by their inability to fully recollect the origins or meanings of these spatial events and their pre-reflective impingements on the body.